# Arduino-FVM

This library provides a token threaded Forth kernel that may be
embedded in Arduino sketches. The kernel can be used as a debug
shell or even full scale Forth applications.

![shell-screenshot](img/shell-screenshot.png)

The Forth Virtual Machine allows multi-tasking which makes it easy to
integrate with the Arduino core library functions. Context switch to
and from the virtual machine is as low as 8 us (halt) and 10 us
(yield/branch).

![compiler-screenshot](img/compiler-screenshot.png)

A code generator, token compiler, example sketch is available. Forth
declarations are translated to the Forth Virtual Machine instruction
set and dictionary format. The token compiler is also an excellent
example of mixing forth, C/C++ and Arduino library functions in the
same sketch.

The Forth Virtual Machine (FVM) with 130 instructions is approx. 5.4
Kbyte without kernel dictionary table and strings. This adds approx. 1
Kbyte. The instruction level trace adds an additional 500 bytes. Many of
the kernel instructions are defined in both C++ and FVM
instructions. This allows tailoring for speed and/or size.

## Tokens

The Forth Virtual Machine is byte token threaded. Most kernel and
application tokens are a single byte. A prefix token is used to
extend beyond 256 tokens. A total of 512 tokens are allowed; 0..255
are kernel tokens and 256..511 are application tokens. Kernel tokens
are operations codes. These can be C++ code and/or threaded code (in
FVM.cpp). The application tokens are always threaded code.

Kernel tokens 0..127 are direct operation codes while tokens 128..255
require a prefix token (OP_KERNEL). Application tokens 256..383
(-1..-128) are direct nested by the kernel. The token value are the
one-complement index to threaded code in a table in program memory.

Application tokens 384..511 require a token prefix (OP_CALL) to the
mapped values 0..127 which are the index to threaded code in a table
in data memory (i.e. token minus 384).

## Optimizations

The token threading inner interpreter uses several optimizations to
reduce calls, i.e. return stack push and pop of return addresses.

The first optimization, the _token mapping_ (-1..-128) allows the
inner interpreter to directly handle calls of threaded code. The inner
interpreter will perform the nesting.

The second optimization, _tail call reduction_, allows the inner
interpreter to perform a jump to threaded code instead of call when
the succeeding operation is EXIT. This reduces return stack depth,
pushing and poping return address. The optimization is also used for
prefix operations (OP_KERNEL and OP_CALL).

## Install

Download and unzip the Arduino-FVM library into your sketchbook
libraries directory. Rename from Arduino-FVM-master to FVM.

The FVM library and examples should be found in the Arduino IDE
File>Examples menu.
